README.md, before:

# BigchainDB Enhancement Proposals (BEPs)

This is the BigchainDB Enhancement Proposal project. We collect BEPs for APIs, protocols, and processes.

The process to add or change a BEP is the following:

- A BEP is created and modified by pull requests according to [BEP-1 (our variant of C4)](./1).
- The BEP life-cycle SHOULD follow the life-cycle defined in [BEP-2 (our variant of COSS)](./2).
- Non-cosmetic changes are allowed only on [Raw](./2#raw-beps) and [Draft](./2#draft-beps) specifications.

## Current BEPs

Short Name   | Title                                                         | Type     | Status     | Editor
-------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|----------|------------|-------
[BEP-1](1)   | Collective Code Construction Contract                         | Meta     | Draft      | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-2](2)   | Consensus-Oriented Specification System                       | Meta     | Draft      | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-3](3)   | Dynamically add/update/remove validators at runtime           | Standard | Stable     | Vanshdeep Singh
[BEP-4](4)   | Standard process to set up a local node for development & testing, using Docker Compose | Standard | Raw | Muawia Khan
[BEP-5](5)   | Dealing with Illegal Data                                     | Informational | Raw   | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-6](6)   | Shared Workspace Protocol                                     | Meta     | Draft      | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-7](7)   | Definition of the BigchainDB Public API                       | Informational | Raw   | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-8](8)   | Restore system state after crash                              | Standard | Raw        | Vanshdeep Singh
[BEP-10](10) | A Strangler Application Approach to Rewriting Some Code in Go | Informational | Raw   | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-11](11) | ORM Implementation for Official BigchainDB Python Driver      | Standard | Raw        | Manan Patel
[BEP-12](12) | BigchainDB Transaction Spec v1                                | Standard | Stable     | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-13](13) | BigchainDB Transaction Spec v2                                | Standard | Stable     | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-14](14) | Guidelines to Improve Drivers Reliability                     | Standard | Raw        | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-15](15) | Ethereum Integration Tools & Demo 1                           | Standard | Raw        | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-16](16) | How to handle external pull requests                          | Meta     | Stable     | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-17](17) | Listing BigchainDB in Azure Marketplace, Phase 1              | Standard | Raw        | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-18](18) | Transactional Election Process                                | Standard | Draft      | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-19](19) | Tendermint Performance Profiling                              | Informational | Raw   | Zach Bowen
[BEP-20](20) | Bounties in the BigchainDB Ecosystem                          | Meta     | Raw        | Chalid Mannaa
[BEP-21](21) | Dynamically add/update/remove validators at runtime           | Standard | Raw        | Vanshdeep Singh
[BEP-42](42) | Handling new transaction models and storage schemas           | Informational | Raw   | Vanshdeep Singh

## Current Participants

### Contributors

- Anyone who wants to contribute
- The whole [BigchainDB Team in Berlin](https://github.com/orgs/bigchaindb/people)

### Maintainers

Everyone with the ability to merge pull requests. Today that is mainly BigchainDB employees.

In the future, we can add more people who are not BigchainDB employees as maintainers.

Some people have specializations:

- Python Driver: Katha
- JavaScript Driver: Manolo
- Core: Vanshdeep, Alberto
- Docker, Kubernetes, NGINX: Shahbaz, Muawia
- Docs: Troy

### Administrators (Founders and Others)

- Kamal - @GataKamsky
- Gautam - @gautamdhameja
- Alberto - @vrde
- Vanshdeep - @kansi
- Troy - @ttmc
- Trent - @trentmc (Inactive but advising)

Note: Administrators serve limited terms of six months or less. That's the idea, anyway.

Commit message:

Problem: there is no performance analysis of bdb
Solution: run some performance tests and write a report about it.

README.md, after:

# BigchainDB Enhancement Proposals (BEPs)

This is the BigchainDB Enhancement Proposal project. We collect BEPs for APIs, protocols, and processes.

The process to add or change a BEP is the following:

- A BEP is created and modified by pull requests according to [BEP-1 (our variant of C4)](./1).
- The BEP life-cycle SHOULD follow the life-cycle defined in [BEP-2 (our variant of COSS)](./2).
- Non-cosmetic changes are allowed only on [Raw](./2#raw-beps) and [Draft](./2#draft-beps) specifications.

## Current BEPs

Short Name   | Title                                                         | Type     | Status     | Editor
-------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|----------|------------|-------
[BEP-1](1)   | Collective Code Construction Contract                         | Meta     | Draft      | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-2](2)   | Consensus-Oriented Specification System                       | Meta     | Draft      | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-3](3)   | Dynamically add/update/remove validators at runtime           | Standard | Stable     | Vanshdeep Singh
[BEP-4](4)   | Standard process to set up a local node for development & testing, using Docker Compose | Standard | Raw | Muawia Khan
[BEP-5](5)   | Dealing with Illegal Data                                     | Informational | Raw   | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-6](6)   | Shared Workspace Protocol                                     | Meta     | Draft      | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-7](7)   | Definition of the BigchainDB Public API                       | Informational | Raw   | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-8](8)   | Restore system state after crash                              | Standard | Raw        | Vanshdeep Singh
[BEP-10](10) | A Strangler Application Approach to Rewriting Some Code in Go | Informational | Raw   | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-11](11) | ORM Implementation for Official BigchainDB Python Driver      | Standard | Raw        | Manan Patel
[BEP-12](12) | BigchainDB Transaction Spec v1                                | Standard | Stable     | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-13](13) | BigchainDB Transaction Spec v2                                | Standard | Stable     | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-14](14) | Guidelines to Improve Drivers Reliability                     | Standard | Raw        | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-15](15) | Ethereum Integration Tools & Demo 1                           | Standard | Raw        | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-16](16) | How to handle external pull requests                          | Meta     | Stable     | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-17](17) | Listing BigchainDB in Azure Marketplace, Phase 1              | Standard | Raw        | Troy McConaghy
[BEP-18](18) | Transactional Election Process                                | Standard | Draft      | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-19](19) | Tendermint Performance Profiling                              | Informational | Raw   | Zach Bowen
[BEP-20](20) | Bounties in the BigchainDB Ecosystem                          | Meta     | Raw        | Chalid Mannaa
[BEP-21](21) | Dynamically add/update/remove validators at runtime           | Standard | Raw        | Vanshdeep Singh
[BEP-22](22) | Performance Study: Analysis of Transaction Throughput in a BigchainDB Network | Informational | Raw        | Alberto Granzotto
[BEP-42](42) | Handling new transaction models and storage schemas           | Informational | Raw   | Vanshdeep Singh

## Current Participants

### Contributors

- Anyone who wants to contribute
- The whole [BigchainDB Team in Berlin](https://github.com/orgs/bigchaindb/people)

### Maintainers

Everyone with the ability to merge pull requests. Today that is mainly BigchainDB employees.

In the future, we can add more people who are not BigchainDB employees as maintainers.

Some people have specializations:

- Python Driver: Katha
- JavaScript Driver: Manolo
- Core: Vanshdeep, Alberto
- Docker, Kubernetes, NGINX: Shahbaz, Muawia
- Docs: Troy

### Administrators (Founders and Others)

- Kamal - @GataKamsky
- Gautam - @gautamdhameja
- Alberto - @vrde
- Vanshdeep - @kansi
- Troy - @ttmc
- Trent - @trentmc (Inactive but advising)

Note: Administrators serve limited terms of six months or less. That's the idea, anyway.
