21/README.md, before:

```
shortname: BEP-21
name: Dynamically add/update/remove validators at runtime
type: Standard
Status: Draft
editor: Vanshdeep Singh <vanshdeep@bigchaindb.com>
```

## Description

The current [BEP-3](../3/) spec for adding new validators requires that the node administrators coordinate when dynamically adding a new validator i.e. all the node operators have to simultaneously execute `upsert-validator` in order to ensure that the validator is added on all the nodes. A lack of coordination can result in a situation wherein only a part of the network updates their validator set which could eventually lead to a network hangup. Furthermore, for a sufficiently large network the coordination itself can become a tedious task.
Another major issue with the current implementation is that a new dynamically added validator (`V_i`) cannot be propagated to any new dynamically added validators added after `V_i` i.e. consider the following scenario,

- Given a 4 node network wherein the `genesis.json` file contains each of the four nodes `{N1,N2,N3,N4}` a validator.
- When a new node `N5` is to be dynamically added, each node executes `upsert-validator` on their respective nodes (including `N5`) and adds `N5`.
- When another new node `N6` needs to be added then each of the nodes in the network `{N1,N2,N3,N4,N5}` execute `upsert-validator` to add the new node `N6`.
- At this point the node `N6` won't see `N5` as a validator because the `genesis.json` would only contain `{N1,N2,N3,N4}` as validators.
- Since `N5` was added dynamically and `upsert-validator` only mutates the local validator set of a given node it implies that in order for the `N6` to see `N5` as a validator it would have to execute `upsert-validator N5_PUB_KEY N5_POWER` on its own node at the exact block height (when syncing with the network) when `N5` was previously added by the network.

From the above description it is evident that propagating dynamically added validators is a major hassle with huge possibility of errors.

## Technical Details

To solve the aforementioned issue, the following change to the behaviour of `upsert-validator` is being proposed. We use the transaction election process (TEP) proposed in [BEP 18](../18) to automate and synchronize the operation on the validator set.

Consider a network of 4 nodes `{A,B,C,D}`. If a node `A` wishes to add a new node `E` to the network then following steps should be followed,

1. Node `A` executes

   ```
   $ bigchaindb election new upsert-validator E_PUBKEY E_POWER E_NODE_ID --private-key /home/user/.tendermint/config/priv_validator.json
   [SUCCESS] Submitted proposal with id: <election_id>
   ```

  The above command `POST`s a `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` transaction and returns the `election_id`.

  NOTE:

  - The `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` transaction is signed with the private key of the validator proposing the election. The private key is generated by Tendermint, and stored in the `priv_validator.json` in the Tendermint's `$TMHOME` directory (usually located at `~/.tendermint/`).
  - `E_POWER` should be such that `0 < E_POWER < TOTAL_POWER/3` where `TOTAL_POWER` denotes the total voting power of the current network.
  - `E_NODE_ID` can be generated by executing `tendermint show_node_id` in the shell of the node


2. The `election_id` is then manually sent (via email or message) to all members of the network.

3. The node operator can list the contents of `election_id` request using [`bigchaindb election show ...`](../18),

   ```
   $ bigchaindb election show <election_id>
   public_key=Wn2DedV9OA0LJJjOxr7Sl7jqCSYjQihA6dCBX+iHaEI=
   power=10
   node_id=82190eb6396bdd80b83aef0f931d0f45738ed075
   status=ONGOING
   ```

4. If the node operator aggrees to the operation being proposed by the `election_id` then they can vote on the same using the following,

   ```
   $ bigchaindb election approve <election_id> --private-key /home/user/.tendermint/config/priv_validator.json
   ```

  The above command `POST`s a `VOTE` transaction casting the vote of the node for given `election_id`.
  NOTE: The `VOTE` transaction is signed using the private key generated and stored by Tendermint in `priv_validator.json`.

### Two New Transaction Types & Validating Them

Two new transaction ("operation") types are proposed, namely `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` and `VOTE`. The `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` transaction is an extension of the`CREATE` transaction and `VOTE` is an extension of `TRANSFER`. A `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` transaction must satisfy all the constraints that a `CREATE` transaction must satisfy, plus some additional ones (e.g. its own JSON schema). A `VOTE` transaction must satisfy all the constraints that a `TRANSFER` transaction must satisfy, plus some additional ones (e.g. its own JSON schema).

### Election Process

#### Valid Election

A valid `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` is one where the total change to validator set power is < 1/3 `CURRENT_POWER`.

#### Valid Vote

A validator can choose to vote/delegate/burn their vote. It is purely up to a voter to decide how to spend their vote.

#### Election Conclusion

Election conclusion is inherited from [TEP definition](../18#concluding-election). Note that this BEP is aimed at implementing only [constrained approach](../18#constrained-approach-approach-1).

## Backwards Compatibility

The approach suggested in this specification is entirely different. The previous approach involved storing `upsert-validator` request in a seperate collection, which will not be required anymore. So migrating to the implementation of this new approach would involve to optionally drop collection holding the `upsert-validator` request.

## Implementation

### Assignees

- @kansi
- @ldmberman
- @z-bowen

### Targeted Release

BigchainDB 2.0.0b6

## References

- [BEP-3](../3)
- [BEP-18](../18)
- [Tendermint validators](http://tendermint.readthedocs.io/en/master/specification/validators.html)

## Copyright Waiver

<p xmlns:dct="http://purl.org/dc/terms/">
  <a rel="license"
     href="http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/">
    <img src="http://i.creativecommons.org/p/zero/1.0/88x31.png" style="border-style: none;" alt="CC0" />
  </a>
  <br />
  To the extent possible under law, all contributors to this BEP
  have waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this BEP.
</p>

Commit message:

Remove all YAML JSON Schema files & point to the ones in the bigchaindb/bigchaindb repo (#93)

21/README.md, after:

```
shortname: BEP-21
name: Dynamically add/update/remove validators at runtime
type: Standard
Status: Draft
editor: Vanshdeep Singh <vanshdeep@bigchaindb.com>
```

## Description

The original [BEP-3](../3/) spec for adding new validators required that the node administrators coordinate when dynamically adding a new validator i.e. all the node operators have to simultaneously execute `upsert-validator` in order to ensure that the validator is added on all the nodes. A lack of coordination can result in a situation wherein only a part of the network updates their validator set which could eventually lead to a network hangup. Furthermore, for a sufficiently large network the coordination itself can become a tedious task.
Another major issue with the current implementation is that a new dynamically added validator (`V_i`) cannot be propagated to any new dynamically added validators added after `V_i` i.e. consider the following scenario,

- Given a 4 node network wherein the `genesis.json` file contains each of the four nodes `{N1,N2,N3,N4}` a validator.
- When a new node `N5` is to be dynamically added, each node executes `upsert-validator` on their respective nodes (including `N5`) and adds `N5`.
- When another new node `N6` needs to be added then each of the nodes in the network `{N1,N2,N3,N4,N5}` execute `upsert-validator` to add the new node `N6`.
- At this point the node `N6` won't see `N5` as a validator because the `genesis.json` would only contain `{N1,N2,N3,N4}` as validators.
- Since `N5` was added dynamically and `upsert-validator` only mutates the local validator set of a given node it implies that in order for the `N6` to see `N5` as a validator it would have to execute `upsert-validator N5_PUB_KEY N5_POWER` on its own node at the exact block height (when syncing with the network) when `N5` was previously added by the network.

From the above description it is evident that propagating dynamically added validators is a major hassle with huge possibility of errors.

## Technical Details

To solve the aforementioned issue, the following change to the behaviour of `upsert-validator` is being proposed. We use the transaction election process (TEP) proposed in [BEP 18](../18) to automate and synchronize the operation on the validator set.

Consider a network of 4 nodes `{A,B,C,D}`. If a node `A` wishes to add a new node `E` to the network then following steps should be followed,

1. Node `A` executes

   ```
   $ bigchaindb election new upsert-validator E_PUBKEY E_POWER E_NODE_ID --private-key /home/user/.tendermint/config/priv_validator.json
   [SUCCESS] Submitted proposal with id: <election_id>
   ```

  The above command `POST`s a `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` transaction and returns the `election_id`.

  NOTE:

  - The `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` transaction is signed with the private key of the validator proposing the election. The private key is generated by Tendermint, and stored in the `priv_validator.json` in the Tendermint's `$TMHOME` directory (usually located at `~/.tendermint/`).
  - `E_POWER` should be such that `0 < E_POWER < TOTAL_POWER/3` where `TOTAL_POWER` denotes the total voting power of the current network.
  - `E_NODE_ID` can be generated by executing `tendermint show_node_id` in the shell of the node


2. The `election_id` is then manually sent (via email or message) to all members of the network.

3. The node operator can list the contents of `election_id` request using [`bigchaindb election show ...`](../18),

   ```
   $ bigchaindb election show <election_id>
   public_key=Wn2DedV9OA0LJJjOxr7Sl7jqCSYjQihA6dCBX+iHaEI=
   power=10
   node_id=82190eb6396bdd80b83aef0f931d0f45738ed075
   status=ONGOING
   ```

4. If the node operator aggrees to the operation being proposed by the `election_id` then they can vote on the same using the following,

   ```
   $ bigchaindb election approve <election_id> --private-key /home/user/.tendermint/config/priv_validator.json
   ```

  The above command `POST`s a `VOTE` transaction casting the vote of the node for given `election_id`.
  NOTE: The `VOTE` transaction is signed using the private key generated and stored by Tendermint in `priv_validator.json`.

### Two New Transaction Types & Validating Them

Two new transaction ("operation") types are proposed, namely `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` and `VOTE`. The `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` transaction is an extension of the`CREATE` transaction and `VOTE` is an extension of `TRANSFER`. A `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` transaction must satisfy all the constraints that a `CREATE` transaction must satisfy, plus some additional ones (e.g. its own JSON Schema). A `VOTE` transaction must satisfy all the constraints that a `TRANSFER` transaction must satisfy, plus some additional ones (e.g. its own JSON Schema).

Note: At the time of writing, all BigchainDB JSON Schema files (YAML files) could be found in the `bigchaindb/common/schema/` directory of [the bigchaindb/bigchaindb repository on GitHub](https://github.com/bigchaindb/bigchaindb).

### Election Process

#### Valid Election

A valid `VALIDATOR_ELECTION` is one where the total change to validator set power is < 1/3 `CURRENT_POWER`.

#### Valid Vote

A validator can choose to vote/delegate/burn their vote. It is purely up to a voter to decide how to spend their vote.

#### Election Conclusion

Election conclusion is inherited from [TEP definition](../18#concluding-election). Note that this BEP is aimed at implementing only [constrained approach](../18#constrained-approach-approach-1).

## Backwards Compatibility

The approach suggested in this specification is entirely different. The previous approach involved storing `upsert-validator` request in a seperate collection, which will not be required anymore. So migrating to the implementation of this new approach would involve to optionally drop collection holding the `upsert-validator` request.

## Implementation

### Assignees

- @kansi
- @ldmberman
- @z-bowen

### Targeted Release

BigchainDB 2.0.0b6

## References

- [BEP-3](../3)
- [BEP-18](../18)
- [Tendermint validators](http://tendermint.readthedocs.io/en/master/specification/validators.html)

## Copyright Waiver

<p xmlns:dct="http://purl.org/dc/terms/">
  <a rel="license"
     href="http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/">
    <img src="http://i.creativecommons.org/p/zero/1.0/88x31.png" style="border-style: none;" alt="CC0" />
  </a>
  <br />
  To the extent possible under law, all contributors to this BEP
  have waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this BEP.
</p>
