utxo-info/README.md, before:

```
shortname: ?/UTXO-IMPL
name: A short discription of the current UTXO implementation
type: informational
status: Draft
editor: Vanshdeep Singh <vanshdeep@bigchaindb.com>
```

## Description
The UTXO (unspent transaction output) of each transaction is tracked using the a merkle tree. The merkle root of this tree is used as the app hash and retuned to Tendermint during `commit`. Below is a short summary of the UTXO is calculated,

- Each unspent output is considered as a leaf node in the merkle tree.
- The nodes are added/removed with each incoming transaction i.e. during `commit` when the transactions are being processed for bulk write the UTXO are updated in the `utxo` collection.
- Once all the transactions in a block are processed and stored, all the objects in the `utxo` collection are fetched and stored i.e. a list of leaves is prepared.
- The merkle root is calculated using this list of leaves.


## Copyright Waiver
To the extent possible under law, the person who associated CC0 with this work has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this work.

Commit message:

Problem: Description of merkle root calculation unclear
Solution: Add more details.

utxo-info/README.md, after:

```
shortname: ?/UTXO-IMPL
name: A short description of the current UTXO implementation
type: informational
status: Draft
editor: Vanshdeep Singh <vanshdeep@bigchaindb.com>
```

## Description
The UTXO (unspent transaction output) of each transaction is tracked using the a [merkle tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree). The merkle root of this tree is used as the app hash and returned to Tendermint during `commit`. Below is a short summary of how the UTXO is calculated,

- Each unspent output is considered as a leaf node in the merkle tree.
- The unspent outputs are stored in `utxo` collection in MongoDB.
- The unspent outputs are added/removed from the `utxo` collection with each incoming transaction i.e. during `commit` when the transactions are being processed for bulk write the UTXO are updated in the `utxo` collection.
- Once the transactions in a block are processed and stored, all the objects in the `utxo` collection are fetched.
- This list of unspent outputs fetched from the `utxo` collection is considered as the leaves of the UTXO merkle tree. Refer the image below,
- The list of leaves is hashed and sorted after which the merkle root is calculated by pairing adjacent leaves.

![Merkel Tree](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/95/Hash_Tree.svg/800px-Hash_Tree.svg.png)




## Copyright Waiver
To the extent possible under law, the person who associated CC0 with this work has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this work.
